2678 schedule pending appt doc (#38527)
department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-team: platform/engineering/design-docs/2022-03-11-schedule-pending-appt.md

# Scheduling Pending Appointments

**Author(s):** Andrew Herzberg  
**Last Updated:** March 11,2022  
**Status:** **Draft** | In Review | Approved  
**Approvers:** _Person A_ \[ \], _Person B_ \[ \], ...  

## Overview

### Objective
The goal is to add the feature to the mobile app to schedule pending appointments. This functionality is currently available in `vets-website` so much of the logic can be utilized in the mobile app.

The intended audience is for the engineering team.

### Background

> Currently, the `vets-website` scheduling feature is as follows:  

Author: Maybe a [sequence diagram](https://plantuml.com/sequence-diagram) could help illustrate the current state?

Reviewer: No problem. Created. Were you thinking the diagram and the current background or in place of?

  - Get facility data 
  - `/vaos/v2/facilities?children=true&ids[]={facility id}&ids[]={facility id}`
  - Note: facility id's come from registered facilities in `/v0/user`
  - Get additional facility scheduling information such as services provided and if available to schedule request (including child facilities)
  - `/vaos/v2/scheduling/configurations?facility_ids[]={facility_id}&facility_ids[]={facility_id}`
- User chooses facility
  - Check if able to schedule request at given facility and service 
  - `/vaos/v2/eligibility?facility_id={id}&clinical_service_id={service_type}&type=request`
  - Multiple checks and responses are done here:
      - Is this a Cerner facility? if so, return cerner portal link
      - Is primary facility? if not, ensure veteran has had visit within 12-24 months to proceed
      - Is facility allow scheduled requests?, 
      - Is request limit reached?
- If Community Cares facility, choose provider
  - `/facilities_api/v1/ccp/provider?{coordinate information}`
- Choose desired date and times then schedule appointment request and post appointment request
  - `/vaos/v2/appointments` 

### High Level Design

> Implementation of this feature will largely follow the logic listed in the background with a key difference to improve user experience. all consumed APIS will be aggregated at the beginning of the process in order to create a single new endpoint to provide all information needed to schedule a request. It will only list types of care that are supported, along with the facilities that support that type of service. This will benefit the process in multiple ways:

Author: Running it through my grammar app...
```suggestion
Implementation of this feature will largely follow the logic listed in the background, with a key difference in improving user experience. We will aggregate all consumed APIs at the beginning of the process in order to create a single new endpoint to provide all information needed to schedule a request. It will only list types of care that are supported, along with the facilities that support that type of service. This will benefit the process in multiple ways.:
```

   - Move any business logic from the front end to the back end 
   - Simplify overall backend and front complexity. 
   - Create a better UX experience. Users will know of a service and facility eligibility before selecting it and waiting for a response.  

> 

Author: ☝️ These are great reasons 👍

## Specifics

### Detailed Design

> The backend business logic will mirror the process explained in the background above except rather then only querying the selected types of service and facilities, all registered facilities will be queried to create a comprehensive list. If load times get unacceptably long due to front loading all queries, we will explore pre-caching results. 

Author: ```suggestion
The backend business logic will mirror the process explained in the background above except rather than only querying the selected service and facilities, we will query all registered facilities to create a comprehensive list. If load times get unacceptably long due to front loading all queries, we will explore pre-caching results.
```

New endpoint data structure:
```json

> {

Author: Could this be in [JSON-API format](https://jsonapi.org/examples/)?

Author: This seems very simple... which is great! Just surprised it took multiple calls before to get this data (and I'm sure the backend will still be complex).

Reviewer: Sounds good. Done. Let me know if I missed any aspect of the JSON-API format

               }
            }
         ]
      }
   ]
}
```
Note: Direct scheduling will be hardcoded to false until direct schedule feature is added.

### Code Location
In `vets-api`, a controller will be created called `schedule_appointment_request_controller`. Serializers, models, and services will be placed in their corresponding folders in `modules/mobile/app`

### Testing Plan
Specs will be written for each service, adapter and controller, to provide full code coverage.

### Logging
Logging will be done similar to how other Mobile API endpoints are logged, through the Rails Logger and Sentry.

### Debugging
Debugging will be done similar to how other Mobile API endpoints are debugged, utilizing logs and Sentry to diagnose issues and testing individual endpoints to isolate issues.

### Caveats
To be determined.

### Security Concerns
N/A

### Privacy Concerns
N/A

### Open Questions and Risks
Will aggregating all external requests at the beginning of the process cause long load times? If so, we may want to precache results. 

Are endpoints we'll be consuming reliable enough to have a good user experience?

### Work Estimates
TODO

### Alternatives

> Rather then relying on other endpoints, we could create these features from the ground up to ensure we have full control of all parts of development and maintenance but it has been a long established objective of the Mobile API to reuse backend integrations wherever possible and to not add complexity to an already complex system. Creating redundant logic would not serve either of these objectives

Author: ```suggestion
Rather than relying on other endpoints, we could create these features from the ground up to ensure we have full control of all parts of development and maintenance but it has been a long established aim of the Mobile API to reuse backend integrations wherever possible and to not add complexity to an already complex system. Creating redundant logic would not serve either of these objectives.
```

# Scheduling Pending Appointments

**Author(s):** Andrew Herzberg  
**Last Updated:** March 11,2022  
**Status:** **Draft** | In Review | Approved  
**Approvers:** _Person A_ \[ \], _Person B_ \[ \], ...  

## Overview

### Objective
The goal is to add the feature to the mobile app to schedule pending appointments. This functionality is currently available in `vets-website` so much of the logic can be utilized in the mobile app.

The intended audience is for the engineering team.

### Background
Currently, the `vets-website` scheduling feature is as follows:

![XL9BReCm4DrpYhb0Ue0igaIehRfgrQZT4tYGQOrDFKCaRbz3BOXYb6mGiZtly-RjH0klVMkoJu6dpICTuC_mMyfTs_QMTQ2yy11wCjpmaSruye7V7g94cNKACgXrIs_M35IUKFu8rSw7NoUmf4C7SZL9mEKIsJy-RG9LeBnB99spWkmq4RbnSX8QnaxE2OI-zXJ8yfoudhv2c00C4alFHJd2CeHURP3O5ihEhhgP3-jbflQk](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1910447/158439763-fd97627e-1bb7-4053-bb30-86436b64a2a4.png)

> - Pick type of care to schedule an appointment for

Reviewer 2: Do we know if this is specific to the user? We know there are some eligibility requirements around "user is registered at facility and does not have more than two outstanding requests at facility". Do these endpoints do those checks? I assume they do, but if they don't we could set up an overnight cron job that collects this info for all facilities and caches it, which would substantially improve response time.

Reviewer 2: The v0 version of this process (as documented here: https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-team/pull/35452/files) also fetched the past two years of appointments, and I speculated that it was how we fetched the available facilities. I believe two years is the cut off we've heard for facility eligibility, so that would be consistent. I'm really not sure why the web app fetches past appointments here, but it would be kinda crazy to have the front end fetch past appointments and have its own logic to determine eligibility. That logic should definitely be in the back end.

   - Check community care eligibility  
   - `/vaos/v0/community_care/eligibility/{type of care}`
   - Receive true or false for type of care
- If type of care is eligible, user can select to make appointment request at VA facility or community cares facility
- User is given list of facilities to choose from
  - Get facility data 
  - `/vaos/v2/facilities?children=true&ids[]={facility id}&ids[]={facility id}`
  - Note: facility id's come from registered facilities in `/v0/user`
  - Get additional facility scheduling information such as services provided and if available to schedule request (including child facilities)
  - `/vaos/v2/scheduling/configurations?facility_ids[]={facility_id}&facility_ids[]={facility_id}`
- User chooses facility
  - Check if able to schedule request at given facility and service 
  - `/vaos/v2/eligibility?facility_id={id}&clinical_service_id={service_type}&type=request`

>   - Multiple checks and responses are done here:

Reviewer 2: So it looks like this is where those user specific checks occur. So maybe it is possible to cache the above results and then the only external requests we have to make for eligibility are for user data and this.

Reviewer: yes, that'd be a good way of caching it.

  - `/vaos/v2/appointments` 

### High Level Design
Implementation of this feature will largely follow the logic listed in the background, with the goal of improving the user experience. We will aggregate all consumed APIs at the beginning of the process in order to create a single new endpoint to provide all information needed to schedule a request. It will only list types of care that are supported, along with the facilities that support that type of service. This will benefit the process in multiple ways:
   - Move any business logic from the front end to the back end 
   - Simplify overall backend and front complexity. 
   - Create a better UX experience. Users will know of a service and facility eligibility before selecting it and waiting for a response.  

## Specifics

### Detailed Design
The backend business logic will mirror the process explained in the background above except rather than only querying the selected service and facilities, we will query all registered facilities to create a comprehensive list. If load times get unacceptably long due to front loading all queries, we will explore pre-caching results.

New endpoint data structure:
```json
{
   "data": {

>       "type": "schedule-appointment",

Reviewer: Per our discussion on slack, we landed on `appointment-eligibility` instead.

### Testing Plan
Specs will be written for each service, adapter and controller, to provide full code coverage.

### Logging
Logging will be done similar to how other Mobile API endpoints are logged, through the Rails Logger and Sentry.

### Debugging
Debugging will be done similar to how other Mobile API endpoints are debugged, utilizing logs and Sentry to diagnose issues and testing individual endpoints to isolate issues.

### Caveats
To be determined.

### Security Concerns
N/A

### Privacy Concerns
N/A

### Open Questions and Risks
Will aggregating all external requests at the beginning of the process cause long load times? If so, we may want to precache results. 

This uses new VAOS endpoints that have not yet been finalized. By the time we finalize our implementation, theirs should also be, but we will need to ensure that is the case, so consumed APIs don’t change out from underneath us. 

Are endpoints we'll be consuming reliable enough to have a good user experience?

### Work Estimates

> 4 weeks.

Reviewer: I forgot to put this in the work estimates, but I was thinking we could divide some work up to be done in parallel. Separate the eligibility check endpoint with the `create`. I'm good with still padding it a bit more.
